doc/source/plugins.rst, before:

*******
Plugins
*******

Most commonly, plugin modules help CrossHair understand 3rd party packages that are
implemented in C. (also known as "extension modules")

CrossHair will generally understand 3rd party packages written in pure Python
out-of-the-box.

Using Plugins
=============

Just install the plugin package the same way you added "crosshair-tool".

If you write your own plugin, let us know so we can reference it here!

.. note::

    You can also register a plugin on a per-execution basis by using the
    ``--extra_plugin`` command line option, followed by your plugin files.

Writing Plugins
===============

**Re-writing classes and functions**

Typically, your plugin will re-implement the classes and functions of the native
package, and then tell CrossHair to use those instead.

Here is an example plugin package that attempts to mimic a hypothetical native Python
package called ``bunnies``.

.. code-block::

    # crosshair_plugin_bunnies.py

    from crosshair import register_patch, register_type, SymbolicFactory

    # import the original, native implementations:
    from bunnies import Bunny, introduce_bunnies

    # Replicate the native "Bunny" class in pure Python:

    class _Bunny:
        happiness: int
        def __init__(self, factory: SymbolicFactory):
            # CrossHair will pass your constructor a factory that you can use to create
            # more symbolic values of any other type.
            self.happiness = factory(int)

        def pet(self: _Bunny) -> None:
            self.happiness += 1

    # Replicate functions too:

    AnyBunny = Union[Bunny, _Bunny]  # arguments can be any kind of Bunny
    def _introduce_bunnies(bunny1: AnyBunny, bunny2: AnyBunny) -> None:
        bunny1.happiness += 1
        bunny2.happiness += 1
    

    # Tell CrossHair to use these implementations instead of the native ones:
    register_type(bunnies.Bunny, _Bunny)
    register_patch(bunnies.introduce_bunnies, _introduce_bunnies)


To let CrossHair know that your package is a plugin, define an "entry point" for your
distribution with a key of ``crosshair.plugin``, like so:

.. code-block::

    # setup.py

    from setuptools import setup
    setup(
        name="crosshair-plugin-bunnies",
        py_modules=["crosshair_plugin_bunnies"],
        entry_points={"crosshair.plugin": ["bunnies = crosshair_plugin_bunnies"]},
    )

**Adding contracts to external functions**

Re-writing classes and functions certainly takes some time, so here is another class of
plugins to specify contracts for external functions without re-implementing them. During
analysis, CrossHair will skip executing such functions. Instead, it will check if the
preconditions hold and then assume the postconditions are satisfied.

In addition to registering functions implemented in C, one might also wish to register
other Python functions, which are not fully checked by CrossHair (if you are using the
``--report_all`` option, for example).

As an example, suppose you want to use ``random.randint`` in your code but CrossHair
cannot exhaustively verify it because of its non-deterministic behavior.
You can register a contract for this function as follows:

.. code-block::

    from crosshair.register_contract import register_contract
    from random import Random
    register_contract(
        Random.randint,
        pre=lambda a, b: a <= b,
        post=lambda __return__, a, b: a <= __return__ <= b,
    )

.. note::

    The names ``a`` and ``b`` above come from the definition of ``randint``.
    These names must be correct and CrossHair will throw an error if you register
    contracts with other argument names. In order to find the correct names, look for
    the source code or the documentation of the function.


If you register a function for which CrossHair cannot infer the signature, a
``ContractRegistrationError`` will be raised. In such cases, you need to register the
signature for the function as well. As an example here, we will register the function
``numpy.random.randint`` (note that numpy is a C module):

.. code-block::

    from crosshair.register_contract import register_contract
    import numpy as np
    from inspect import Parameter, Signature
    randint_sig = Signature(
        parameters=[
            Parameter("self", Parameter.POSITIONAL_OR_KEYWORD),
            Parameter("low", Parameter.POSITIONAL_OR_KEYWORD, annotation=int),
            Parameter("high", Parameter.POSITIONAL_OR_KEYWORD, annotation=int),
        ],
        return_annotation=int,
    )
    register_contract(
        np.random.RandomState.randint,
        pre=lambda low, high: low < high,
        post=lambda __return__, low, high: low <= __return__ < high,
        sig=randint_sig,
    )

Now assume you write the following test:

.. code-block::

    import numpy as np
    def myrandom(a: int) -> int:
        """
        pre: a < 10
        post: _ > a
        """
        return np.random.randint(a, 10)


When you run ``crosshair check`` on this test file, with the above plugin, you will see
the fault:

.. code-block::

    error: false when calling myrandom(0)
    with crosshair.patch_to_return({<method 'randint' of 'numpy.random.mtrand.RandomState' objects>: [0]})

This is telling you that if you call ``myrandom(0)`` and ``randint`` returns ``0``, the
postcondition fails. Indeed, the postcondition is wrong and should be ``_ >= a``
instead!

.. note::

    The ``crosshair.patch_to_return(...)`` expression above may be used in a
    `with statement <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#context-managers>`__
    to reproduce the failure.

.. note::

    You might have noticed that we registered ``np.random.RandomState.randint`` and not
    ``np.random.randint``. This is because the latter is a
    `bound function <https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-methods/>`__
    (it is the method of a particular ``RandomState`` instance). However, we want to
    register the class function directly, so that our contract holds when calling
    ``randint`` on any ``RandomState`` instance. Note that for most functions, you
    will not have to think about this at all.
    For curious people: If you look into the source code of ``numpy.random.mtrand.pyx``,
    you will see how the bound function is defined: ``_rand = RandomState()`` and then
    ``randint = _rand.randint``. We indeed see that this is the method of a specific
    instance of ``RandomState``.

Finally, you can also make use of the ``crosshair.register_contract.register_module``
function to register **all** functions of a module. Simply pass the modules you want to
register as an argument to the function. At runtime, CrossHair will register all
functions encountered which belong to this module, assuming no pre- or postcondition.
If you want to specify a pre- or postcondition, use the ``register_contract`` function
seen above.

.. note::
    Functions ``__init__``, ``__init_subclass__`` and ``__new__`` are not concerned by
    module registration. Also note that registering a whole module might be too much in
    some cases and you might fallback to register individual functions instead.

Commit message:

Remove `register_modules` from documentation
This function is still experimental.

doc/source/plugins.rst, after:

*******
Plugins
*******

Most commonly, plugin modules help CrossHair understand 3rd party packages that are
implemented in C. (also known as "extension modules")

CrossHair will generally understand 3rd party packages written in pure Python
out-of-the-box.

Using Plugins
=============

Just install the plugin package the same way you added "crosshair-tool".

If you write your own plugin, let us know so we can reference it here!

.. note::

    You can also register a plugin on a per-execution basis by using the
    ``--extra_plugin`` command line option, followed by your plugin files.

Writing Plugins
===============

**Re-writing classes and functions**

Typically, your plugin will re-implement the classes and functions of the native
package, and then tell CrossHair to use those instead.

Here is an example plugin package that attempts to mimic a hypothetical native Python
package called ``bunnies``.

.. code-block::

    # crosshair_plugin_bunnies.py

    from crosshair import register_patch, register_type, SymbolicFactory

    # import the original, native implementations:
    from bunnies import Bunny, introduce_bunnies

    # Replicate the native "Bunny" class in pure Python:

    class _Bunny:
        happiness: int
        def __init__(self, factory: SymbolicFactory):
            # CrossHair will pass your constructor a factory that you can use to create
            # more symbolic values of any other type.
            self.happiness = factory(int)

        def pet(self: _Bunny) -> None:
            self.happiness += 1

    # Replicate functions too:

    AnyBunny = Union[Bunny, _Bunny]  # arguments can be any kind of Bunny
    def _introduce_bunnies(bunny1: AnyBunny, bunny2: AnyBunny) -> None:
        bunny1.happiness += 1
        bunny2.happiness += 1
    

    # Tell CrossHair to use these implementations instead of the native ones:
    register_type(bunnies.Bunny, _Bunny)
    register_patch(bunnies.introduce_bunnies, _introduce_bunnies)


To let CrossHair know that your package is a plugin, define an "entry point" for your
distribution with a key of ``crosshair.plugin``, like so:

.. code-block::

    # setup.py

    from setuptools import setup
    setup(
        name="crosshair-plugin-bunnies",
        py_modules=["crosshair_plugin_bunnies"],
        entry_points={"crosshair.plugin": ["bunnies = crosshair_plugin_bunnies"]},
    )

**Adding contracts to external functions**

Re-writing classes and functions certainly takes some time, so here is another class of
plugins to specify contracts for external functions without re-implementing them. During
analysis, CrossHair will skip executing such functions. Instead, it will check if the
preconditions hold and then assume the postconditions are satisfied.

In addition to registering functions implemented in C, one might also wish to register
other Python functions, which are not fully checked by CrossHair (if you are using the
``--report_all`` option, for example).

As an example, suppose you want to use ``random.randint`` in your code but CrossHair
cannot exhaustively verify it because of its non-deterministic behavior.
You can register a contract for this function as follows:

.. code-block::

    from crosshair.register_contract import register_contract
    from random import Random
    register_contract(
        Random.randint,
        pre=lambda a, b: a <= b,
        post=lambda __return__, a, b: a <= __return__ <= b,
    )

.. note::

    The names ``a`` and ``b`` above come from the definition of ``randint``.
    These names must be correct and CrossHair will throw an error if you register
    contracts with other argument names. In order to find the correct names, look for
    the source code or the documentation of the function.


If you register a function for which CrossHair cannot infer the signature, a
``ContractRegistrationError`` will be raised. In such cases, you need to register the
signature for the function as well. As an example here, we will register the function
``numpy.random.randint`` (note that numpy is a C module):

.. code-block::

    from crosshair.register_contract import register_contract
    import numpy as np
    from inspect import Parameter, Signature
    randint_sig = Signature(
        parameters=[
            Parameter("self", Parameter.POSITIONAL_OR_KEYWORD),
            Parameter("low", Parameter.POSITIONAL_OR_KEYWORD, annotation=int),
            Parameter("high", Parameter.POSITIONAL_OR_KEYWORD, annotation=int),
        ],
        return_annotation=int,
    )
    register_contract(
        np.random.RandomState.randint,
        pre=lambda low, high: low < high,
        post=lambda __return__, low, high: low <= __return__ < high,
        sig=randint_sig,
    )

Now assume you write the following test:

.. code-block::

    import numpy as np
    def myrandom(a: int) -> int:
        """
        pre: a < 10
        post: _ > a
        """
        return np.random.randint(a, 10)


When you run ``crosshair check`` on this test file, with the above plugin, you will see
the fault:

.. code-block::

    error: false when calling myrandom(0)
    with crosshair.patch_to_return({<method 'randint' of 'numpy.random.mtrand.RandomState' objects>: [0]})

This is telling you that if you call ``myrandom(0)`` and ``randint`` returns ``0``, the
postcondition fails. Indeed, the postcondition is wrong and should be ``_ >= a``
instead!

.. note::

    The ``crosshair.patch_to_return(...)`` expression above may be used in a
    `with statement <https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#context-managers>`__
    to reproduce the failure.

.. note::

    The code above was just an example to show how to register a signature along with
    the contract. In reality, ``numpy.random.randint`` is overloaded and you should
    register a list of signatures instead of only one.

.. note::

    You might have noticed that we registered ``np.random.RandomState.randint`` and not
    ``np.random.randint``. This is because the latter is a
    `bound function <https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/python-methods/>`__
    (it is the method of a particular ``RandomState`` instance). However, we want to
    register the class function directly, so that our contract holds when calling
    ``randint`` on any ``RandomState`` instance. Note that for most functions, you
    will not have to think about this at all.
    For curious people: If you look into the source code of ``numpy.random.mtrand.pyx``,
    you will see how the bound function is defined: ``_rand = RandomState()`` and then
    ``randint = _rand.randint``. We indeed see that this is the method of a specific
    instance of ``RandomState``.
